---
collection: replicationexercises
title: "Optimal Replacement of GMC Bus Engines: An Empirical Model of Harold Zurcher"
permalink: /replicationexercises/rust1987/
---

## The Model

### State Variable

The unique state variable $x_t$ is the the accumulated mileage (since last replacement) on the bus engine at time $t$. It is discretized into 90 intervals of length 5000, i.e., all the possible values of the state variable are in the set $\{5000, 10000, 15000, \ldots, 450000\}$.

The transition probability of this state variable is characterized by parameter $p_0,p_1,p_2$ with $p_0 + p_1 + p_2 = 1$. To be specific, after each period, if the engine is not replaced i.e., $d_t = 0$, then next period state variable can only take three possible values $x_t, x_t + 5000, x_t+10000$. The transition probability matrix is characterized by two parameters:

$$
p_j = \operatorname{Pr}\{x_{t+1} = x_t + 5000*j \mid x_t, d_t=0\}, j = 0, 1
$$

If at period $t$, the engine is replaced, i.e., $d_t = 1$, then the next period state variable can take values $5000, 10000, 15000$, each with probability $p_j, j=0,1,2$, respectively.

### Utility

Per-period utility function takes the form:

$$
u\left(x_t, i_t, \theta\right)= \begin{cases}-R C-c\left(0, \theta\right) & \text { if } d_t=1, \\ -c\left(x_t, \theta\right) & \text { if } d_t=0.\end{cases}
$$

where the replacement cost $RC$ is a parameter to be estimated, and assume the cost function takes the linear form, with $\theta$ to be estimated,

$$
c(x_t,\theta) = \theta * x_t.
$$

Therefore, there are only four parameters need to be estimated: $RC, p_0, p_1, \theta$.

### Problem

The corresponding Bellman Equation is:

$$
V(x_t, \varepsilon_t) = \max_{i_t} \bigl\{u(x_t, d_t, \theta) + \varepsilon_t(d_t) + \beta E\left[ V\left( x_{t+1}, \varepsilon_{t+1} \right) \mid x_t, \varepsilon_t \right]\bigl\}
$$

where

$$
E\left[ V\left( x_{t+1}, \varepsilon_{t+1} \right) \mid x_t, \varepsilon_t \right] \equiv \int_y \int_\eta V(y, \eta) p\left(d y, d \eta \mid x_t, \varepsilon_t, d_t\right).
$$

We first impose conditional independence assumption. Then we further assume that the distribution of the unobserved state variable $\varepsilon_t(i)$ follows an iid type I extreme value distribution. 

Now we can describe the relationships between the ex ante (or integrated) value function $\overline{V}(x_t)$, conditional value function $v\left(x_t, d_t\right)$ and conditional choice probabilities $p_t\left(d_t \mid x_t\right)$ in the following way (these terms are borrowed from Arcidiacono and Ellickson (2011) which has a clearer representation of general dynamic discrete choice problems):

$$
\overline{V}(x_t) \equiv \int V(x_t, \epsilon_t) g(\epsilon_t) d \epsilon_t = \ln \left\{\sum_{d_t^{\prime} \in D} \exp \left[v_t\left(x_t, d_t^{\prime}\right)\right]\right\}+\gamma
$$

$$
v\left(x_t, d_t\right) \equiv u\left(x_t, d_t\right)+\beta \int \overline{V}\left(x_{t+1}\right) f\left(x_{t+1} \mid x_t, d_t\right) d x_{t+1}
$$

$$
p_t\left(d_t \mid x_t\right)=\frac{\exp \left[v_t\left(x_t, d_t\right)\right]}{\sum_{d_t^{\prime} \in D} \exp \left[v_t\left(x_t, d_t^{\prime}\right)\right]}=\frac{1}{\sum_{d_t^{\prime}\in D} \exp \left[v_t\left(x_t, d_t^{\prime}\right)-v_t\left(x_t, d_t\right)\right]}
$$

In this binary choice case, 

$$
\overline{V}(x_t)= \ln \left\{ \exp\left(u(x_t, 1) + \sum_{j = 0, 1, 2 } p_j * \overline{V}(j*5000)\right) + \exp\left(u(x_t, 0) + \sum_{j = 0, 1, 2 } p_j * \overline{V}(x_{t}+j*5000)\right)\right\};  \qquad (\star)
$$

$$
v\left(x_t, 1\right) = u(x_t, 1) + \beta * \left( \sum_{j =0,1,2} p_j * \overline{V}(x_t) \right), \qquad v\left(x_t, 0\right) = u(x_t, 0) + \beta * \left( \sum_{j =0,1,2} p_j * \overline{V}(x_t) \right);
$$

$$
p(d_t=1 \mid x_t) = \frac{v\left(x_t, 1\right)}{v\left(x_t, 1\right) + v\left(x_t, 0\right)}, \ \qquad p(d_t=0 \mid x_t) = \frac{v\left(x_t, 0\right)}{v\left(x_t, 1\right) + v\left(x_t, 0\right)}.
$$

The above five equations provide us the most important codes in MATLAB.

## Full-Solution Estimation

### Estimation Procedures: NXFP

1. We first nonparametrically estimate the parameters $p_0, p_1$.
2. Given the estimates $\hat{p_0}, \hat{p_1}$ and any possible parameter values for $RC, \theta$, we first calculate the ex ante value function $\overline{V}(x_t)$, which is a 90 by 1 vector.
3. The ex ante value function is the solution to Equation $(\star)$.
4. Then, we can easily obtain the conditional value function $v(x_t, d)$ and the conditional choice probabilities $p(d\mid x_t)$, which are both 90 by 1 vectors. 
5. Finally, we go through all possible parameter values for $RC, \theta$ to maximize the log likelihood of the conditional choice.

### Notes for MATLAB Codes

1. A preliminary function definition: fun_utility.m
2. Inner fixed point algorithm: 
fun_iteration.m - Given an initial guess of $\overline{V}(x_t)$ (90 by 1 vector), the probability transition matrices (two 90 by 90 matrices, one for each  decision), and utility (two 90 by 1 vector), use Equation $(\star)$ to get the next iteration values (90 by 1 vector).
fun_inner_algo.m - Return a “correct” ex ante value function, $\overline{V}(x_t)$ (90 by 1 vector).
3. Outer maximization algorithm:
fun_loglik.m - Given the correct ex ante value function, $\overline{V}(x_t)$, compute the conditional choice probabilities  (which gives the probability of engine replacement under  current value of the state variable) and form (negative) log-likelihood of the sample.
estimation.m - Use the MATLAB function fmincon to search all possible parameter values  $RC, \theta$ to maximize the log likelihood function.

Note: The standard maximization algorithm may be a user written BHHH algorithm.

Before all the steps, we need first run the data_generation.m file to simulate the data with pre-specified parameter values (same as the Group 4 estimates in Table IX in the original paper)

## Hotz-Miller Methods

### Intuition

1. Conditional choice probabilities can also be non-parametrically estimated from the data.
2. There is a one-to-one map from the conditional choice probabilities to the conditional value functions.
3. The renewal decision $d=  1$ means that the form of the mapping is quite easy.

For more explanation, see also Arcidiacono and Ellickson (2011).

### Explanation of MATLAB Codes